the project gutenberg ebook of hamlet, prince of denmark this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or reuse it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook. title hamlet, prince of denmark author william shakespeare release date november ,   most recently updated november ,  language english credits dianne bean  start of the project gutenberg ebook hamlet, prince of denmark  cover the tragedy of hamlet, prince of denmark by william shakespeare contents act i scene i. elsinore. a platform before the castle scene ii. elsinore. a room of state in the castle scene iii. a room in poloniuss house scene iv. the platform scene v. a more remote part of the castle act ii scene i. a room in poloniuss house scene ii. a room in the castle act iii scene i. a room in the castle scene ii. a hall in the castle scene iii. a room in the castle scene iv. another room in the castle act iv scene i. a room in the castle scene ii. another room in the castle scene iii. another room in the castle scene iv. a plain in denmark scene v. elsinore. a room in the castle scene vi. another room in the castle scene vii. another room in the castle act v scene i. a churchyard scene ii. a hall in the castle dramatis person hamlet, prince of denmark claudius, king of denmark, hamlets uncle the ghost of the late king, hamlets father gertrude, the queen, hamlets mother, now wife of claudius polonius, lord chamberlain laertes, son to polonius ophelia, daughter to polonius horatio, friend to hamlet fortinbras, prince of norway voltemand, courtier cornelius, courtier rosencrantz, courtier guildenstern, courtier marcellus, officer barnardo, officer francisco, a soldier osric, courtier reynaldo, servant to polonius players a gentleman, courtier a priest two clowns, gravediggers a captain english ambassadors. lords, ladies, officers, soldiers, sailors, messengers, and attendants scene. elsinore. act i scene i. elsinore. a platform before the castle. enter francisco and barnardo, two sentinels. barnardo. whos there? francisco. nay, answer me. stand and unfold yourself. barnardo. long live the king! francisco. barnardo? barnardo. he. francisco. you come most carefully upon your hour. barnardo. tis now struck twelve. get thee to bed, francisco. francisco. for this relief much thanks. tis bitter cold, and i am sick at heart. barnardo. have you had quiet guard? francisco. not a mouse stirring. barnardo. well, good night. if you do meet horatio and marcellus, the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste. enter horatio and marcellus. francisco. i think i hear them. stand, ho! who is there? horatio. friends to this ground. marcellus. and liegemen to the dane. francisco. give you good night. marcellus. o, farewell, honest soldier, who hath relievd you? francisco. barnardo has my place. give you goodnight.  marcellus. holla, barnardo! barnardo. say, what, is horatio there? horatio. a piece of him. barnardo. welcome, horatio. welcome, good marcellus. marcellus. what, has this thing appeard again tonight? barnardo. i have seen nothing. marcellus. horatio says tis but our fantasy, and will not let belief take hold of him touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us. therefore i have entreated him along with us to watch the minutes of this night, that if again this apparition come he may approve our eyes and speak to it. horatio. tush, tush, twill not appear. barnardo. sit down awhile, and let us once again assail your ears, that are so fortified against our story, what we two nights have seen. horatio. well, sit we down, and let us hear barnardo speak of this. barnardo. last night of all, when yond same star thats westward from the pole, had made his course tillume that part of heaven where now it burns, marcellus and myself, the bell then beating one marcellus. peace, break thee off. look where it comes again. enter ghost. barnardo. in the same figure, like the king thats dead. marcellus. thou art a scholar speak to it, horatio. barnardo. looks it not like the king? mark it, horatio. horatio. most like. it harrows me with fear and wonder. barnardo it would be spoke to. marcellus. question it, horatio. horatio. what art thou that usurpst this time of night, together with that fair and warlike form in which the majesty of buried denmark did sometimes march? by heaven i charge thee speak. marcellus. it is offended. barnardo. see, it stalks away. horatio. stay! speak, speak! i charge thee speak!  marcellus. tis gone, and will not answer. barnardo. how now, horatio! you tremble and look pale. is not this something more than fantasy? what think you ont? horatio. before my god, i might not this believe without the sensible and true avouch of mine own eyes. marcellus. is it not like the king? horatio. as thou art to thyself such was the very armour he had on when he thambitious norway combated so frownd he once, when in an angry parle he smote the sledded polacks on the ice. tis strange. marcellus. thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch. horatio. in what particular thought to work i know not but in the gross and scope of my opinion, this bodes some strange eruption to our state. marcellus. good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, why this same strict and most observant watch so nightly toils the subject of the land, and why such daily cast of brazen cannon and foreign mart for implements of war why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task does not divide the sunday from the week. what might be toward, that this sweaty haste doth make the night jointlabourer with the day who ist that can inform me? horatio. that can i at least, the whisper goes so. our last king, whose image even but now appeard to us, was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway, thereto prickd on by a most emulate pride, dard to the combat in which our valiant hamlet, for so this side of our known world esteemd him, did slay this fortinbras who by a seald compact, well ratified by law and heraldry, did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands which he stood seizd of, to the conqueror against the which, a moiety competent was gaged by our king which had returnd to the inheritance of fortinbras, had he been vanquisher as by the same covnant and carriage of the article designd, his fell to hamlet. now, sir, young fortinbras, of unimproved mettle, hot and full, hath in the skirts of norway, here and there, sharkd up a list of lawless resolutes, for food and diet, to some enterprise that hath a stomach int which is no other, as it doth well appear unto our state, but to recover of us by strong hand and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands so by his father lost. and this, i take it, is the main motive of our preparations, the source of this our watch, and the chief head of this posthaste and rummage in the land. barnardo. i think it be no other but een so well may it sort that this portentous figure comes armed through our watch so like the king that was and is the question of these wars. horatio. a mote it is to trouble the minds eye. in the most high and palmy state of rome, a little ere the mightiest julius fell, the graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead did squeak and gibber in the roman streets as stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, disasters in the sun and the moist star, upon whose influence neptunes empire stands, was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. and even the like precurse of fierce events, as harbingers preceding still the fates and prologue to the omen coming on, have heaven and earth together demonstrated unto our climatures and countrymen. reenter ghost. but, soft, behold! lo, where it comes again! ill cross it, though it blast me. stay, illusion! if thou hast any sound, or use of voice, speak to me. if there be any good thing to be done, that may to thee do ease, and grace to me, speak to me. if thou art privy to thy countrys fate, which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, o speak! or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life extorted treasure in the womb of earth, for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, speak of it. stay, and speak!  stop it, marcellus! marcellus. shall i strike at it with my partisan? horatio. do, if it will not stand. barnardo. tis here! horatio. tis here!  marcellus. tis gone! we do it wrong, being so majestical, to offer it the show of violence, for it is as the air, invulnerable, and our vain blows malicious mockery. barnardo. it was about to speak, when the cock crew. horatio. and then it started, like a guilty thing upon a fearful summons. i have heard the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, doth with his lofty and shrillsounding throat awake the god of day and at his warning, whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, thextravagant and erring spirit hies to his confine. and of the truth herein this present object made probation. marcellus. it faded on the crowing of the cock. some say that ever gainst that season comes wherein our saviours birth is celebrated, the bird of dawning singeth all night long and then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad, the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike, no fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm so hallowd and so gracious is the time. horatio. so have i heard, and do in part believe it. but look, the morn in russet mantle clad, walks oer the dew of yon high eastward hill. break we our watch up, and by my advice, let us impart what we have seen tonight unto young hamlet for upon my life, this spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, as needful in our loves, fitting our duty? marcellus. lets dot, i pray, and i this morning know where we shall find him most conveniently.  scene ii. elsinore. a room of state in the castle. enter claudius king of denmark, gertrude the queen, hamlet, polonius, laertes, voltemand, cornelius, lords and attendant. king. though yet of hamlet our dear brothers death the memory be green, and that it us befitted to bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom to be contracted in one brow of woe yet so far hath discretion fought with nature that we with wisest sorrow think on him, together with remembrance of ourselves. therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, thimperial jointress to this warlike state, have we, as twere with a defeated joy, with one auspicious and one dropping eye, with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, in equal scale weighing delight and dole, taken to wife nor have we herein barrd your better wisdoms, which have freely gone with this affair along. for all, our thanks. now follows, that you know young fortinbras, holding a weak supposal of our worth, or thinking by our late dear brothers death our state to be disjoint and out of frame, colleagued with this dream of his advantage, he hath not faild to pester us with message, importing the surrender of those lands lost by his father, with all bonds of law, to our most valiant brother. so much for him. now for ourself and for this time of meeting thus much the business is we have here writ to norway, uncle of young fortinbras, who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears of this his nephews purpose, to suppress his further gait herein in that the levies, the lists, and full proportions are all made out of his subject and we here dispatch you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand, for bearers of this greeting to old norway, giving to you no further personal power to business with the king, more than the scope of these dilated articles allow. farewell and let your haste commend your duty. cornelius and voltemand. in that, and all things, will we show our duty. king. we doubt it nothing heartily farewell.  and now, laertes, whats the news with you? you told us of some suit. what ist, laertes? you cannot speak of reason to the dane, and lose your voice. what wouldst thou beg, laertes, that shall not be my offer, not thy asking? the head is not more native to the heart, the hand more instrumental to the mouth, than is the throne of denmark to thy father. what wouldst thou have, laertes? laertes. dread my lord, your leave and favour to return to france, from whence though willingly i came to denmark to show my duty in your coronation yet now i must confess, that duty done, my thoughts and wishes bend again toward france, and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon. king. have you your fathers leave? what says polonius? polonius. he hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave by laboursome petition and at last upon his will i seald my hard consent. i do beseech you give him leave to go. king. take thy fair hour, laertes time be thine, and thy best graces spend it at thy will! but now, my cousin hamlet, and my son hamlet.  a little more than kin, and less than kind. king. how is it that the clouds still hang on you? hamlet. not so, my lord, i am too much i the sun. queen. good hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark. do not for ever with thy vailed lids seek for thy noble father in the dust. thou knowst tis common, all that lives must die, passing through nature to eternity. hamlet. ay, madam, it is common. queen. if it be, why seems it so particular with thee? hamlet. seems, madam! nay, it is i know not seems. tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, nor customary suits of solemn black, nor windy suspiration of forcd breath, no, nor the fruitful river in the eye, nor the dejected haviour of the visage, together with all forms, moods, shows of grief, that can denote me truly. these indeed seem, for they are actions that a man might play but i have that within which passeth show these but the trappings and the suits of woe. king. tis sweet and commendable in your nature, hamlet, to give these mourning duties to your father but you must know, your father lost a father, that father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound in filial obligation, for some term to do obsequious sorrow. but to persevere in obstinate condolement is a course of impious stubbornness. tis unmanly grief, it shows a will most incorrect to heaven, a heart unfortified, a mind impatient, an understanding simple and unschoold for what we know must be, and is as common as any the most vulgar thing to sense, why should we in our peevish opposition take it to heart? fie, tis a fault to heaven, a fault against the dead, a fault to nature, to reason most absurd, whose common theme is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, from the first corse till he that died today, this must be so. we pray you throw to earth this unprevailing woe, and think of us as of a father for let the world take note you are the most immediate to our throne, and with no less nobility of love than that which dearest father bears his son do i impart toward you. for your intent in going back to school in wittenberg, it is most retrograde to our desire and we beseech you bend you to remain here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son. queen. let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet. i pray thee stay with us go not to wittenberg. hamlet. i shall in all my best obey you, madam. king. why, tis a loving and a fair reply. be as ourself in denmark. madam, come this gentle and unforcd accord of hamlet sits smiling to my heart in grace whereof, no jocund health that denmark drinks today but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, and the kings rouse the heaven shall bruit again, respeaking earthly thunder. come away.  hamlet. o that this too too solid flesh would melt, thaw, and resolve itself into a dew! or that the everlasting had not fixd his canon gainst selfslaughter. o god! o god! how weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this world! fie ont! oh fie! tis an unweeded garden that grows to seed things rank and gross in nature possess it merely. that it should come to this! but two months deadnay, not so much, not two so excellent a king that was to this hyperion to a satyr so loving to my mother, that he might not beteem the winds of heaven visit her face too roughly. heaven and earth! must i remember? why, she would hang on him as if increase of appetite had grown by what it fed on and yet, within a month let me not think ontfrailty, thy name is woman! a little month, or ere those shoes were old with which she followed my poor fathers body like niobe, all tears.why she, even she o god! a beast that wants discourse of reason would have mournd longer,married with mine uncle, my fathers brother but no more like my father than i to hercules. within a month, ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears had left the flushing in her galled eyes, she married. o most wicked speed, to post with such dexterity to incestuous sheets! it is not, nor it cannot come to good. but break, my heart, for i must hold my tongue. enter horatio, marcellus and barnardo. horatio. hail to your lordship! hamlet. i am glad to see you well horatio, or i do forget myself. horatio. the same, my lord, and your poor servant ever. hamlet. sir, my good friend ill change that name with you and what make you from wittenberg, horatio? marcellus? marcellus. my good lord. hamlet. i am very glad to see you.good even, sir. but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg? horatio. a truant disposition, good my lord. hamlet. i would not hear your enemy say so nor shall you do my ear that violence, to make it truster of your own report against yourself. i know you are no truant. but what is your affair in elsinore? well teach you to drink deep ere you depart. horatio. my lord, i came to see your fathers funeral. hamlet. i prithee do not mock me, fellowstudent. i think it was to see my mothers wedding. horatio. indeed, my lord, it followd hard upon. hamlet. thrift, thrift, horatio! the funeral bakd meats did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. would i had met my dearest foe in heaven or ever i had seen that day, horatio. my father,methinks i see my father. horatio. where, my lord? hamlet. in my minds eye, horatio. horatio. i saw him once he was a goodly king. hamlet. he was a man, take him for all in all, i shall not look upon his like again. horatio. my lord, i think i saw him yesternight. hamlet. saw? who? horatio. my lord, the king your father. hamlet. the king my father! horatio. season your admiration for a while with an attent ear, till i may deliver upon the witness of these gentlemen this marvel to you. hamlet. for gods love let me hear. horatio. two nights together had these gentlemen, marcellus and barnardo, on their watch in the dead waste and middle of the night, been thus encounterd. a figure like your father, armed at point exactly, cappie, appears before them, and with solemn march goes slow and stately by them thrice he walkd by their oppressd and fearsurprised eyes, within his truncheons length whilst they, distilld almost to jelly with the act of fear, stand dumb, and speak not to him. this to me in dreadful secrecy impart they did, and i with them the third night kept the watch, where, as they had deliverd, both in time, form of the thing, each word made true and good, the apparition comes. i knew your father these hands are not more like. hamlet. but where was this? marcellus. my lord, upon the platform where we watch. hamlet. did you not speak to it? horatio. my lord, i did but answer made it none yet once methought it lifted up it head, and did address itself to motion, like as it would speak. but even then the morning cock crew loud, and at the sound it shrunk in haste away, and vanishd from our sight. hamlet. tis very strange. horatio. as i do live, my honourd lord, tis true and we did think it writ down in our duty to let you know of it. hamlet. indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. hold you the watch tonight? marcellus and barnardo. we do, my lord. hamlet. armd, say you? both. armd, my lord. hamlet. from top to toe? both. my lord, from head to foot. hamlet. then saw you not his face? horatio. o yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up. hamlet. what, lookd he frowningly? horatio. a countenance more in sorrow than in anger. hamlet. pale, or red? horatio. nay, very pale. hamlet. and fixd his eyes upon you? horatio. most constantly. hamlet. i would i had been there. horatio. it would have much amazd you. hamlet. very like, very like. stayd it long? horatio. while one with moderate haste might tell a hundred. marcellus and barnardo. longer, longer. horatio. not when i sawt. hamlet. his beard was grizzled, no? horatio. it was, as i have seen it in his life, a sable silverd. hamlet. i will watch tonight perchance twill walk again. horatio. i warrant you it will. hamlet. if it assume my noble fathers person, ill speak to it, though hell itself should gape and bid me hold my peace. i pray you all, if you have hitherto conceald this sight, let it be tenable in your silence still and whatsoever else shall hap tonight, give it an understanding, but no tongue. i will requite your loves. so, fare ye well. upon the platform twixt eleven and twelve, ill visit you. all. our duty to your honour. hamlet. your loves, as mine to you farewell.  my fathers spirit in arms! all is not well i doubt some foul play would the night were come! till then sit still, my soul foul deeds will rise, though all the earth oerwhelm them, to mens eyes.  scene iii. a room in poloniuss house. enter laertes and ophelia. laertes. my necessaries are embarkd. farewell. and, sister, as the winds give benefit and convoy is assistant, do not sleep, but let me hear from you. ophelia. do you doubt that? laertes. for hamlet, and the trifling of his favour, hold it a fashion and a toy in blood a violet in the youth of primy nature, forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting the perfume and suppliance of a minute no more. ophelia. no more but so? laertes. think it no more. for nature crescent does not grow alone in thews and bulk but as this temple waxes, the inward service of the mind and soul grows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now, and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch the virtue of his will but you must fear, his greatness weighd, his will is not his own for he himself is subject to his birth he may not, as unvalud persons do, carve for himself for on his choice depends the sanctity and health of this whole state and therefore must his choice be circumscribd unto the voice and yielding of that body whereof he is the head. then if he says he loves you, it fits your wisdom so far to believe it as he in his particular act and place may give his saying deed which is no further than the main voice of denmark goes withal. then weigh what loss your honour may sustain if with too credent ear you list his songs, or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open to his unmasterd importunity. fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister and keep you in the rear of your affection, out of the shot and danger of desire. the chariest maid is prodigal enough if she unmask her beauty to the moon. virtue itself scapes not calumnious strokes the canker galls the infants of the spring too oft before their buttons be disclosd, and in the morn and liquid dew of youth contagious blastments are most imminent. be wary then, best safety lies in fear. youth to itself rebels, though none else near. ophelia. i shall theffect of this good lesson keep as watchman to my heart. but good my brother, do not as some ungracious pastors do, show me the steep and thorny way to heaven whilst like a puffd and reckless libertine himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, and recks not his own rede. laertes. o, fear me not. i stay too long. but here my father comes. enter polonius. a double blessing is a double grace occasion smiles upon a second leave. polonius. yet here, laertes? aboard, aboard, for shame. the wind sits in the shoulder of your sail, and you are stayd for. there, my blessing with you.  and these few precepts in thy memory look thou character. give thy thoughts no tongue, nor any unproportiond thought his act. be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar. those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel but do not dull thy palm with entertainment of each newhatchd, unfledgd comrade. beware of entrance to a quarrel but being in, beart that thopposed may beware of thee. give every man thine ear, but few thy voice take each mans censure, but reserve thy judgement. costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, but not expressd in fancy rich, not gaudy for the apparel oft proclaims the man and they in france of the best rank and station are of a most select and generous chief in that. neither a borrower nor a lender be for loan oft loses both itself and friend and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. this above all to thine own self be true and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man. farewell my blessing season this in thee. laertes. most humbly do i take my leave, my lord. polonius. the time invites you go, your servants tend. laertes. farewell, ophelia, and remember well what i have said to you. ophelia. tis in my memory lockd, and you yourself shall keep the key of it. laertes. farewell.  polonius. what ist, ophelia, he hath said to you? ophelia. so please you, something touching the lord hamlet. polonius. marry, well bethought tis told me he hath very oft of late given private time to you and you yourself have of your audience been most free and bounteous. if it be so,as so tis put on me, and that in way of caution,i must tell you you do not understand yourself so clearly as it behoves my daughter and your honour. what is between you? give me up the truth. ophelia. he hath, my lord, of late made many tenders of his affection to me. polonius. affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl, unsifted in such perilous circumstance. do you believe his tenders, as you call them? ophelia. i do not know, my lord, what i should think. polonius. marry, ill teach you think yourself a baby that you have taen these tenders for true pay, which are not sterling. tender yourself more dearly or,not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, running it thus,youll tender me a fool. ophelia. my lord, he hath importund me with love in honourable fashion. polonius. ay, fashion you may call it go to, go to. ophelia. and hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, with almost all the holy vows of heaven. polonius. ay, springes to catch woodcocks. i do know, when the blood burns, how prodigal the soul lends the tongue vows these blazes, daughter, giving more light than heat, extinct in both, even in their promise, as it is amaking, you must not take for fire. from this time be something scanter of your maiden presence set your entreatments at a higher rate than a command to parley. for lord hamlet, believe so much in him that he is young and with a larger tether may he walk than may be given you. in few, ophelia, do not believe his vows for they are brokers, not of that dye which their investments show, but mere implorators of unholy suits, breathing like sanctified and pious bawds, the better to beguile. this is for all i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth have you so slander any moment leisure as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet. look tot, i charge you come your ways. ophelia. i shall obey, my lord.  scene iv. the platform. enter hamlet, horatio and marcellus. hamlet. the air bites shrewdly it is very cold. horatio. it is a nipping and an eager air. hamlet. what hour now? horatio. i think it lacks of twelve. marcellus. no, it is struck. horatio. indeed? i heard it not. it then draws near the season wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.  what does this mean, my lord? hamlet. the king doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, keeps wassail, and the swaggering upspring reels and as he drains his draughts of rhenish down, the kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out the triumph of his pledge. horatio. is it a custom? hamlet. ay marry ist and to my mind, though i am native here, and to the manner born, it is a custom more honourd in the breach than the observance. this heavyheaded revel east and west makes us traducd and taxd of other nations they clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase soil our addition and indeed it takes from our achievements, though performd at height, the pith and marrow of our attribute. so oft it chances in particular men that for some vicious mole of nature in them, as in their birth, wherein they are not guilty, since nature cannot choose his origin, by their oergrowth of some complexion, oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason or by some habit, that too much oerleavens the form of plausive mannersthat these men, carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect, being natures livery or fortunes star, his virtues else,be they as pure as grace, as infinite as man may undergo, shall in the general censure take corruption from that particular fault. the dram of evil doth all the noble substance of a doubt to his own scandal. horatio. look, my lord, it comes! enter ghost. hamlet. angels and ministers of grace defend us! be thou a spirit of health or goblin damnd, bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, be thy intents wicked or charitable, thou comst in such a questionable shape that i will speak to thee. ill call thee hamlet, king, father, royal dane. o, answer me! let me not burst in ignorance but tell why thy canonizd bones, hearsed in death, have burst their cerements why the sepulchre, wherein we saw thee quietly inurnd, hath opd his ponderous and marble jaws to cast thee up again! what may this mean, that thou, dead corse, again in complete steel, revisitst thus the glimpses of the moon, making night hideous, and we fools of nature so horridly to shake our disposition with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls? say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?  horatio. it beckons you to go away with it, as if it some impartment did desire to you alone. marcellus. look with what courteous action it waves you to a more removed ground. but do not go with it. horatio. no, by no means. hamlet. it will not speak then will i follow it. horatio. do not, my lord. hamlet. why, what should be the fear? i do not set my life at a pins fee and for my soul, what can it do to that, being a thing immortal as itself? it waves me forth again. ill follow it. horatio. what if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, or to the dreadful summit of the cliff that beetles oer his base into the sea, and there assume some other horrible form which might deprive your sovereignty of reason, and draw you into madness? think of it. the very place puts toys of desperation, without more motive, into every brain that looks so many fathoms to the sea and hears it roar beneath. hamlet. it waves me still. go on, ill follow thee. marcellus. you shall not go, my lord. hamlet. hold off your hands. horatio. be ruld you shall not go. hamlet. my fate cries out, and makes each petty artery in this body as hardy as the nemean lions nerve.  still am i calld. unhand me, gentlemen.  by heaven, ill make a ghost of him that lets me. i say, away!go on, ill follow thee.  horatio. he waxes desperate with imagination. marcellus. lets follow tis not fit thus to obey him. horatio. have after. to what issue will this come? marcellus. something is rotten in the state of denmark. horatio. heaven will direct it. marcellus. nay, lets follow him.  scene v. a more remote part of the castle. enter ghost and hamlet. hamlet. whither wilt thou lead me? speak, ill go no further. ghost. mark me. hamlet. i will. ghost. my hour is almost come, when i to sulphrous and tormenting flames must render up myself. hamlet. alas, poor ghost! ghost. pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing to what i shall unfold. hamlet. speak, i am bound to hear. ghost. so art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. hamlet. what? ghost. i am thy fathers spirit, doomd for a certain term to walk the night, and for the day confind to fast in fires, till the foul crimes done in my days of nature are burnt and purgd away. but that i am forbid to tell the secrets of my prisonhouse, i could a tale unfold whose lightest word would harrow up thy soul freeze thy young blood, make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres, thy knotted and combined locks to part, and each particular hair to stand on end like quills upon the fretful porpentine. but this eternal blazon must not be to ears of flesh and blood. list, list, o, list! if thou didst ever thy dear father love hamlet. o god! ghost. revenge his foul and most unnatural murder. hamlet. murder! ghost. murder most foul, as in the best it is but this most foul, strange, and unnatural. hamlet. haste me to knowt, that i, with wings as swift as meditation or the thoughts of love may sweep to my revenge. ghost. i find thee apt and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed that rots itself in ease on lethe wharf, wouldst thou not stir in this. now, hamlet, hear. tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, a serpent stung me so the whole ear of denmark is by a forged process of my death rankly abusd but know, thou noble youth, the serpent that did sting thy fathers life now wears his crown. hamlet. o my prophetic soul! mine uncle! ghost. ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, with witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts, o wicked wit, and gifts, that have the power so to seduce!won to his shameful lust the will of my most seemingvirtuous queen. o hamlet, what a falling off was there, from me, whose love was of that dignity that it went hand in hand even with the vow i made to her in marriage and to decline upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor to those of mine. but virtue, as it never will be movd, though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven so lust, though to a radiant angel linkd, will sate itself in a celestial bed and prey on garbage. but soft! methinks i scent the morning air brief let me be. sleeping within my orchard, my custom always of the afternoon, upon my secure hour thy uncle stole with juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, and in the porches of my ears did pour the leperous distilment, whose effect holds such an enmity with blood of man that swift as quicksilver it courses through the natural gates and alleys of the body and with a sudden vigour it doth posset and curd, like eager droppings into milk, the thin and wholesome blood. so did it mine and a most instant tetter barkd about, most lazarlike, with vile and loathsome crust all my smooth body. thus was i, sleeping, by a brothers hand, of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatchd cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, unhousled, disappointed, unaneld no reckoning made, but sent to my account with all my imperfections on my head. o horrible! o horrible! most horrible! if thou hast nature in thee, bear it not let not the royal bed of denmark be a couch for luxury and damned incest. but howsoever thou pursust this act, taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive against thy mother aught leave her to heaven, and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, to prick and sting her. fare thee well at once! the glowworm shows the matin to be near, and gins to pale his uneffectual fire. adieu, adieu, adieu. remember me.  hamlet. o all you host of heaven! o earth! what else? and shall i couple hell? o, fie! hold, my heart and you, my sinews, grow not instant old, but bear me stiffly up. remember thee? ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat in this distracted globe. remember thee? yea, from the table of my memory ill wipe away all trivial fond records, all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, that youth and observation copied there and thy commandment all alone shall live within the book and volume of my brain, unmixd with baser matter. yes, by heaven! o most pernicious woman! o villain, villain, smiling damned villain! my tables. meet it is i set it down, that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain! at least i am sure it may be so in denmark.  so, uncle, there you are. now to my word it is adieu, adieu, remember me. i have swornt. horatio and marcellus.  my lord, my lord. marcellus.  lord hamlet. horatio.  heaven secure him. hamlet. so be it! marcellus.  illo, ho, ho, my lord! hamlet. hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come. enter horatio and marcellus. marcellus. how ist, my noble lord? horatio. what news, my lord? hamlet. o, wonderful! horatio. good my lord, tell it. hamlet. no, youll reveal it. horatio. not i, my lord, by heaven. marcellus. nor i, my lord. hamlet. how say you then, would heart of man once think it? but youll be secret? horatio and marcellus. ay, by heaven, my lord. hamlet. theres neer a villain dwelling in all denmark but hes an arrant knave. horatio. there needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave to tell us this. hamlet. why, right you are i the right and so, without more circumstance at all, i hold it fit that we shake hands and part you, as your business and desire shall point you, for every man hath business and desire, such as it isand for my own poor part, look you, ill go pray. horatio. these are but wild and whirling words, my lord. hamlet. im sorry they offend you, heartily yes faith, heartily. horatio. theres no offence, my lord. hamlet. yes, by saint patrick, but there is, horatio, and much offence too. touching this vision here, it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you. for your desire to know what is between us, oermastert as you may. and now, good friends, as you are friends, scholars, and soldiers, give me one poor request. horatio. what ist, my lord? we will. hamlet. never make known what you have seen tonight. horatio and marcellus. my lord, we will not. hamlet. nay, but sweart. horatio. in faith, my lord, not i. marcellus. nor i, my lord, in faith. hamlet. upon my sword. marcellus. we have sworn, my lord, already. hamlet. indeed, upon my sword, indeed. ghost.  swear. hamlet. ha, ha boy, sayst thou so? art thou there, truepenny? come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage. consent to swear. horatio. propose the oath, my lord. hamlet. never to speak of this that you have seen. swear by my sword. ghost.  swear. hamlet. hic et ubique? then well shift our ground. come hither, gentlemen, and lay your hands again upon my sword. never to speak of this that you have heard. swear by my sword. ghost.  swear. hamlet. well said, old mole! canst work i thearth so fast? a worthy pioner! once more remove, good friends. horatio. o day and night, but this is wondrous strange. hamlet. and therefore as a stranger give it welcome. there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy. but come, here, as before, never, so help you mercy, how strange or odd soeer i bear myself, as i perchance hereafter shall think meet to put an antic disposition on that you, at such times seeing me, never shall, with arms encumberd thus, or this headshake, or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, as well, we know, or we could and if we would, or if we list to speak or there be and if they might, or such ambiguous giving out, to note that you know aught of methis not to do. so grace and mercy at your most need help you, swear. ghost.  swear. hamlet. rest, rest, perturbed spirit. so, gentlemen, with all my love i do commend me to you and what so poor a man as hamlet is may do texpress his love and friending to you, god willing, shall not lack. let us go in together, and still your fingers on your lips, i pray. the time is out of joint. o cursed spite, that ever i was born to set it right. nay, come, lets go together.  act ii scene i. a room in poloniuss house. enter polonius and reynaldo. polonius. give him this money and these notes, reynaldo. reynaldo. i will, my lord. polonius. you shall do marvellous wisely, good reynaldo, before you visit him, to make inquiry of his behaviour. reynaldo. my lord, i did intend it. polonius. marry, well said very well said. look you, sir, enquire me first what danskers are in paris and how, and who, what means, and where they keep, what company, at what expense and finding by this encompassment and drift of question, that they do know my son, come you more nearer than your particular demands will touch it. take you as twere some distant knowledge of him, as thus, i know his father and his friends, and in part himdo you mark this, reynaldo? reynaldo. ay, very well, my lord. polonius. and in part him, but, you may say, not well but ift be he i mean, hes very wild addicted so and so and there put on him what forgeries you please marry, none so rank as may dishonour him take heed of that but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips as are companions noted and most known to youth and liberty. reynaldo. as gaming, my lord? polonius. ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling, drabbing. you may go so far. reynaldo. my lord, that would dishonour him. polonius. faith no, as you may season it in the charge. you must not put another scandal on him, that he is open to incontinency thats not my meaning but breathe his faults so quaintly that they may seem the taints of liberty the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, a savageness in unreclaimed blood, of general assault. reynaldo. but my good lord polonius. wherefore should you do this? reynaldo. ay, my lord, i would know that. polonius. marry, sir, heres my drift, and i believe it is a fetch of warrant. you laying these slight sullies on my son, as twere a thing a little soild i th working, mark you, your party in converse, him you would sound, having ever seen in the prenominate crimes the youth you breathe of guilty, be assurd he closes with you in this consequence good sir, or so or friend, or gentleman according to the phrase or the addition of man and country. reynaldo. very good, my lord. polonius. and then, sir, does he this, he doeswhat was i about to say? by the mass, i was about to say something. where did i leave? reynaldo. at closes in the consequence. at friend or so, and gentleman. polonius. at closes in the consequence ay, marry! he closes with you thus i know the gentleman, i saw him yesterday, or tother day, or then, or then, with such and such and, as you say, there was he gaming, there oertook ins rouse, there falling out at tennis or perchance, i saw him enter such a house of sale videlicet, a brothel, or so forth. see you now your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth and thus do we of wisdom and of reach, with windlasses, and with assays of bias, by indirections find directions out. so by my former lecture and advice shall you my son. you have me, have you not? reynaldo. my lord, i have. polonius. god b wi you, fare you well. reynaldo. good my lord. polonius. observe his inclination in yourself. reynaldo. i shall, my lord. polonius. and let him ply his music. reynaldo. well, my lord. polonius. farewell.  enter ophelia. how now, ophelia, whats the matter? ophelia. alas, my lord, i have been so affrighted. polonius. with what, in the name of god? ophelia. my lord, as i was sewing in my chamber, lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbracd, no hat upon his head, his stockings fould, ungartred, and downgyved to his ankle, pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other, and with a look so piteous in purport as if he had been loosed out of hell to speak of horrors, he comes before me. polonius. mad for thy love? ophelia. my lord, i do not know, but truly i do fear it. polonius. what said he? ophelia. he took me by the wrist and held me hard then goes he to the length of all his arm and with his other hand thus oer his brow, he falls to such perusal of my face as he would draw it. long stayd he so, at last,a little shaking of mine arm, and thrice his head thus waving up and down, he raisd a sigh so piteous and profound as it did seem to shatter all his bulk and end his being. that done, he lets me go, and with his head over his shoulder turnd he seemd to find his way without his eyes, for out o doors he went without their help, and to the last bended their light on me. polonius. come, go with me. i will go seek the king. this is the very ecstasy of love, whose violent property fordoes itself, and leads the will to desperate undertakings, as oft as any passion under heaven that does afflict our natures. i am sorry, what, have you given him any hard words of late? ophelia. no, my good lord but as you did command, i did repel his letters and denied his access to me. polonius. that hath made him mad. i am sorry that with better heed and judgement i had not quoted him. i feard he did but trifle, and meant to wreck thee. but beshrew my jealousy! it seems it is as proper to our age to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions as it is common for the younger sort to lack discretion. come, go we to the king. this must be known, which, being kept close, might move more grief to hide than hate to utter love.  scene ii. a room in the castle. enter king, queen, rosencrantz, guildenstern and attendants. king. welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern. moreover that we much did long to see you, the need we have to use you did provoke our hasty sending. something have you heard of hamlets transformation so i call it, since nor thexterior nor the inward man resembles that it was. what it should be, more than his fathers death, that thus hath put him so much from thunderstanding of himself, i cannot dream of. i entreat you both that, being of so young days brought up with him, and since so neighbourd to his youth and humour, that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court some little time, so by your companies to draw him on to pleasures and to gather, so much as from occasion you may glean, whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus that, opend, lies within our remedy. queen. good gentlemen, he hath much talkd of you, and sure i am, two men there are not living to whom he more adheres. if it will please you to show us so much gentry and good will as to expend your time with us awhile, for the supply and profit of our hope, your visitation shall receive such thanks as fits a kings remembrance. rosencrantz. both your majesties might, by the sovereign power you have of us, put your dread pleasures more into command than to entreaty. guildenstern. we both obey, and here give up ourselves, in the full bent, to lay our service freely at your feet to be commanded. king. thanks, rosencrantz and gentle guildenstern. queen. thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosencrantz. and i beseech you instantly to visit my too much changed son. go, some of you, and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is. guildenstern. heavens make our presence and our practices pleasant and helpful to him. queen. ay, amen.  enter polonius. polonius. thambassadors from norway, my good lord, are joyfully returnd. king. thou still hast been the father of good news. polonius. have i, my lord? assure you, my good liege, i hold my duty, as i hold my soul, both to my god and to my gracious king and i do think,or else this brain of mine hunts not the trail of policy so sure as it hath usd to dothat i have found the very cause of hamlets lunacy. king. o speak of that, that do i long to hear. polonius. give first admittance to thambassadors my news shall be the fruit to that great feast. king. thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.  he tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found the head and source of all your sons distemper. queen. i doubt it is no other but the main, his fathers death and our oerhasty marriage. king. well, we shall sift him. enter polonius with voltemand and cornelius. welcome, my good friends! say, voltemand, what from our brother norway? voltemand. most fair return of greetings and desires. upon our first, he sent out to suppress his nephews levies, which to him appeard to be a preparation gainst the polack but better lookd into, he truly found it was against your highness whereat grievd, that so his sickness, age, and impotence was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests on fortinbras which he, in brief, obeys, receives rebuke from norway and in fine, makes vow before his uncle never more to give thassay of arms against your majesty. whereon old norway, overcome with joy, gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, and his commission to employ those soldiers so levied as before, against the polack with an entreaty, herein further shown,  that it might please you to give quiet pass through your dominions for this enterprise, on such regards of safety and allowance as therein are set down. king. it likes us well and at our more considerd time well read, answer, and think upon this business. meantime we thank you for your welltook labour. go to your rest, at night well feast together. most welcome home.  polonius. this business is well ended. my liege and madam, to expostulate what majesty should be, what duty is, why day is day, night night, and time is time were nothing but to waste night, day and time. therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, i will be brief. your noble son is mad. mad call i it for to define true madness, what ist but to be nothing else but mad? but let that go. queen. more matter, with less art. polonius. madam, i swear i use no art at all. that he is mad, tis true tis true tis pity and pity tis tis true. a foolish figure, but farewell it, for i will use no art. mad let us grant him then. and now remains that we find out the cause of this effect, or rather say, the cause of this defect, for this effect defective comes by cause. thus it remains, and the remainder thus. perpend, i have a daughterhave whilst she is mine who in her duty and obedience, mark, hath given me this. now gather, and surmise.  to the celestial, and my souls idol, the most beautified ophelia thats an ill phrase, a vile phrase beautified is a vile phrase but you shall hear.  these in her excellent white bosom, these, c. queen. came this from hamlet to her? polonius. good madam, stay awhile i will be faithful.  doubt thou the stars are fire, doubt that the sun doth move, doubt truth to be a liar, but never doubt i love. o dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers. i have not art to reckon my groans. but that i love thee best, o most best, believe it. adieu. thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, hamlet. this in obedience hath my daughter showd me and more above, hath his solicitings, as they fell out by time, by means, and place, all given to mine ear. king. but how hath she receivd his love? polonius. what do you think of me? king. as of a man faithful and honourable. polonius. i would fain prove so. but what might you think, when i had seen this hot love on the wing, as i perceivd it, i must tell you that, before my daughter told me, what might you, or my dear majesty your queen here, think, if i had playd the desk or tablebook, or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, or lookd upon this love with idle sight, what might you think? no, i went round to work, and my young mistress thus i did bespeak lord hamlet is a prince, out of thy star. this must not be. and then i precepts gave her, that she should lock herself from his resort, admit no messengers, receive no tokens. which done, she took the fruits of my advice, and he, repulsed,a short tale to make fell into a sadness, then into a fast, thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, thence to a lightness, and, by this declension, into the madness wherein now he raves, and all we wail for. king. do you think tis this? queen. it may be, very likely. polonius. hath there been such a time, id fain know that, that i have positively said tis so, when it provd otherwise? king. not that i know. polonius. take this from this, if this be otherwise.  if circumstances lead me, i will find where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed within the centre. king. how may we try it further? polonius. you know sometimes he walks four hours together here in the lobby. queen. so he does indeed. polonius. at such a time ill loose my daughter to him. be you and i behind an arras then, mark the encounter. if he love her not, and be not from his reason falln thereon, let me be no assistant for a state, but keep a farm and carters. king. we will try it. enter hamlet, reading. queen. but look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading. polonius. away, i do beseech you, both away ill board him presently. o, give me leave.  how does my good lord hamlet? hamlet. well, godamercy. polonius. do you know me, my lord? hamlet. excellent well. you are a fishmonger. polonius. not i, my lord. hamlet. then i would you were so honest a man. polonius. honest, my lord? hamlet. ay sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand. polonius. thats very true, my lord. hamlet. for if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing carrion, have you a daughter? polonius. i have, my lord. hamlet. let her not walk i th sun. conception is a blessing, but not as your daughter may conceive. friend, look tot. polonius. how say you by that?  still harping on my daughter. yet he knew me not at first he said i was a fishmonger. he is far gone, far gone. and truly in my youth i suffered much extremity for love very near this. ill speak to him again.what do you read, my lord? hamlet. words, words, words. polonius. what is the matter, my lord? hamlet. between who? polonius. i mean the matter that you read, my lord. hamlet. slanders, sir. for the satirical slave says here that old men have grey beards that their faces are wrinkled their eyes purging thick amber and plumtree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. all which, sir, though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it not honesty to have it thus set down. for you yourself, sir, should be old as i am, if like a crab you could go backward. polonius.  though this be madness, yet there is method int. will you walk out of the air, my lord? hamlet. into my grave? polonius. indeed, that is out o the air.  how pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. i will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter. my honourable lord, i will most humbly take my leave of you. hamlet. you cannot, sir, take from me anything that i will more willingly part withal, except my life, except my life, except my life. polonius. fare you well, my lord. hamlet. these tedious old fools. enter rosencrantz and guildenstern. polonius. you go to seek the lord hamlet there he is. rosencrantz.  god save you, sir.  guildenstern. my honoured lord! rosencrantz. my most dear lord! hamlet. my excellent good friends! how dost thou, guildenstern? ah, rosencrantz. good lads, how do ye both? rosencrantz. as the indifferent children of the earth. guildenstern. happy in that we are not overhappy on fortunes cap we are not the very button. hamlet. nor the soles of her shoe? rosencrantz. neither, my lord. hamlet. then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours? guildenstern. faith, her privates we. hamlet. in the secret parts of fortune? o, most true she is a strumpet. whats the news? rosencrantz. none, my lord, but that the worlds grown honest. hamlet. then is doomsday near. but your news is not true. let me question more in particular. what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune, that she sends you to prison hither? guildenstern. prison, my lord? hamlet. denmarks a prison. rosencrantz. then is the world one. hamlet. a goodly one in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons, denmark being one o th worst. rosencrantz. we think not so, my lord. hamlet. why, then tis none to you for there is nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it so. to me it is a prison. rosencrantz. why, then your ambition makes it one tis too narrow for your mind. hamlet. o god, i could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that i have bad dreams. guildenstern. which dreams, indeed, are ambition for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream. hamlet. a dream itself is but a shadow. rosencrantz. truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadows shadow. hamlet. then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretchd heroes the beggars shadows. shall we to th court? for, by my fay, i cannot reason. rosencrantz and guildenstern. well wait upon you. hamlet. no such matter. i will not sort you with the rest of my servants for, to speak to you like an honest man, i am most dreadfully attended. but, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at elsinore? rosencrantz. to visit you, my lord, no other occasion. hamlet. beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks but i thank you. and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. were you not sent for? is it your own inclining? is it a free visitation? come, deal justly with me. come, come nay, speak. guildenstern. what should we say, my lord? hamlet. why, anything. but to the purpose. you were sent for and there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not craft enough to colour. i know the good king and queen have sent for you. rosencrantz. to what end, my lord? hamlet. that you must teach me. but let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our everpreserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for or no. rosencrantz.  what say you? hamlet.  nay, then i have an eye of you. if you love me, hold not off. guildenstern. my lord, we were sent for. hamlet. i will tell you why so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. i have of late, but wherefore i know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory this most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave oerhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. what a piece of work is man, how noble in reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving, how express and admirable in action how like an angel, in apprehension, how like a god the beauty of the world, the paragon of animals. and yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not me no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so. rosencrantz. my lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts. hamlet. why did you laugh then, when i said man delights not me? rosencrantz. to think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you. we coted them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service. hamlet. he that plays the king shall be welcome,his majesty shall have tribute of me the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o th sere and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. what players are they? rosencrantz. even those you were wont to take such delight inthe tragedians of the city. hamlet. how chances it they travel? their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways. rosencrantz. i think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation. hamlet. do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the city? are they so followed? rosencrantz. no, indeed, they are not. hamlet. how comes it? do they grow rusty? rosencrantz. nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace but there is, sir, an aerie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped fort. these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stagesso they call themthat many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and dare scarce come thither. hamlet. what, are they children? who maintains em? how are they escoted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common playersas it is most like, if their means are no bettertheir writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession? rosencrantz. faith, there has been much to do on both sides and the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. there was for a while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question. hamlet. ist possible? guildenstern. o, there has been much throwing about of brains. hamlet. do the boys carry it away? rosencrantz. ay, that they do, my lord. hercules and his load too. hamlet. it is not very strange for my uncle is king of denmark, and those that would make mouths at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little. sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.  guildenstern. there are the players. hamlet. gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. your hands, come. the appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which i tell you must show fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. you are welcome. but my unclefather and auntmother are deceived. guildenstern. in what, my dear lord? hamlet. i am but mad northnorthwest. when the wind is southerly, i know a hawk from a handsaw. enter polonius. polonius. well be with you, gentlemen. hamlet. hark you, guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling clouts. rosencrantz. happily hes the second time come to them for they say an old man is twice a child. hamlet. i will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. mark it.you say right, sir for a monday morning twas so indeed. polonius. my lord, i have news to tell you. hamlet. my lord, i have news to tell you. when roscius was an actor in rome polonius. the actors are come hither, my lord. hamlet. buzz, buzz. polonius. upon my honour. hamlet. then came each actor on his ass polonius. the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoralcomical, historicalpastoral, tragicalhistorical, tragicalcomicalhistoricalpastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited. seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light, for the law of writ and the liberty. these are the only men. hamlet. o jephthah, judge of israel, what a treasure hadst thou! polonius. what treasure had he, my lord? hamlet. why one fair daughter, and no more, the which he loved passing well. polonius.  still on my daughter. hamlet. am i not i th right, old jephthah? polonius. if you call me jephthah, my lord, i have a daughter that i love passing well. hamlet. nay, that follows not. polonius. what follows then, my lord? hamlet. why, as by lot, god wot, and then, you know, it came to pass, as most like it was. the first row of the pious chanson will show you more. for look where my abridgement comes. enter four or five players. you are welcome, masters, welcome all. i am glad to see thee well. welcome, good friends. o, my old friend! thy face is valancd since i saw thee last. comst thou to beard me in denmark? what, my young lady and mistress! byr lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. pray god your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. masters, you are all welcome. well een tot like french falconers, fly at anything we see. well have a speech straight. come, give us a taste of your quality. come, a passionate speech. first player. what speech, my lord? hamlet. i heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted, or if it was, not above once, for the play, i remember, pleased not the million, twas caviare to the general. but it wasas i received it, and others, whose judgements in such matters cried in the top of minean excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning. i remember one said there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indite the author of affectation, but called it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. one speech in it, i chiefly loved. twas aeneas tale to dido, and thereabout of it especially where he speaks of priams slaughter. if it live in your memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see the rugged pyrrhus, like th hyrcanian beast, it is not so it begins with pyrrhus the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, black as his purpose, did the night resemble when he lay couched in the ominous horse, hath now this dread and black complexion smeard with heraldry more dismal. head to foot now is he total gules, horridly trickd with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, bakd and impasted with the parching streets, that lend a tyrannous and a damned light to their vile murders. roasted in wrath and fire, and thus oersized with coagulate gore, with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhus old grandsire priam seeks. so, proceed you. polonius. fore god, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion. first player. anon he finds him, striking too short at greeks. his antique sword, rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, repugnant to command. unequal matchd, pyrrhus at priam drives, in rage strikes wide but with the whiff and wind of his fell sword thunnerved father falls. then senseless ilium, seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash takes prisoner pyrrhus ear. for lo, his sword, which was declining on the milky head of reverend priam, seemd i thair to stick. so, as a painted tyrant, pyrrhus stood, and like a neutral to his will and matter, did nothing. but as we often see against some storm, a silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, the bold winds speechless, and the orb below as hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder doth rend the region so after pyrrhus pause, aroused vengeance sets him new awork, and never did the cyclops hammers fall on marss armour, forgd for proof eterne, with less remorse than pyrrhus bleeding sword now falls on priam. out, out, thou strumpet fortune! all you gods, in general synod, take away her power break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven, as low as to the fiends. polonius. this is too long. hamlet. it shall to the barbers, with your beard.prithee say on. hes for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. say on come to hecuba. first player. but who, o who, had seen the mobled queen, hamlet. the mobled queen? polonius. thats good! mobled queen is good. first player. run barefoot up and down, threatning the flames with bisson rheum. a clout upon that head where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, about her lank and all oerteemed loins, a blanket, in thalarm of fear caught up who this had seen, with tongue in venom steepd, gainst fortunes state would treason have pronouncd. but if the gods themselves did see her then, when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sport in mincing with his sword her husbands limbs, the instant burst of clamour that she made, unless things mortal move them not at all, would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, and passion in the gods. polonius. look, where he has not turnd his colour, and has tears ins eyes. pray you, no more. hamlet. tis well. ill have thee speak out the rest of this soon.good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? do you hear, let them be well used for they are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time. after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live. polonius. my lord, i will use them according to their desert. hamlet. gods bodikin, man, much better. use every man after his desert, and who should scape whipping? use them after your own honour and dignity. the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. take them in. polonius. come, sirs. hamlet. follow him, friends. well hear a play tomorrow.  dost thou hear me, old friend? can you play the murder of gonzago? first player. ay, my lord. hamlet. well hat tomorrow night. you could for a need study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which i would set down and insert int, could you not? first player. ay, my lord. hamlet. very well. follow that lord, and look you mock him not.   my good friends, ill leave you till night. you are welcome to elsinore. rosencrantz. good my lord.  hamlet. ay, so, god b wi ye. now i am alone. o what a rogue and peasant slave am i! is it not monstrous that this player here, but in a fiction, in a dream of passion, could force his soul so to his own conceit that from her working all his visage wand tears in his eyes, distraction ins aspect, a broken voice, and his whole function suiting with forms to his conceit? and all for nothing! for hecuba? whats hecuba to him, or he to hecuba, that he should weep for her? what would he do, had he the motive and the cue for passion that i have? he would drown the stage with tears and cleave the general ear with horrid speech make mad the guilty, and appal the free, confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed, the very faculties of eyes and ears. yet i, a dull and muddymettled rascal, peak like johnadreams, unpregnant of my cause, and can say nothing. no, not for a king upon whose property and most dear life a damnd defeat was made. am i a coward? who calls me villain, breaks my pate across? plucks off my beard and blows it in my face? tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i th throat as deep as to the lungs? who does me this? ha! swounds, i should take it for it cannot be but i am pigeonliverd, and lack gall to make oppression bitter, or ere this i should have fatted all the region kites with this slaves offal. bloody, bawdy villain! remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain! oh vengeance! why, what an ass am i! this is most brave, that i, the son of a dear father murderd, prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words and fall acursing like a very drab, a scullion! fie upont! foh! about, my brain! i have heard that guilty creatures sitting at a play, have by the very cunning of the scene, been struck so to the soul that presently they have proclaimd their malefactions. for murder, though it have no tongue, will speak with most miraculous organ. ill have these players play something like the murder of my father before mine uncle. ill observe his looks ill tent him to the quick. if he but blench, i know my course. the spirit that i have seen may be the devil, and the devil hath power tassume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps out of my weakness and my melancholy, as he is very potent with such spirits, abuses me to damn me. ill have grounds more relative than this. the plays the thing wherein ill catch the conscience of the king.  act iii scene i. a room in the castle. enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz and guildenstern. king. and can you by no drift of circumstance get from him why he puts on this confusion, grating so harshly all his days of quiet with turbulent and dangerous lunacy? rosencrantz. he does confess he feels himself distracted, but from what cause he will by no means speak. guildenstern. nor do we find him forward to be sounded, but with a crafty madness keeps aloof when we would bring him on to some confession of his true state. queen. did he receive you well? rosencrantz. most like a gentleman. guildenstern. but with much forcing of his disposition. rosencrantz. niggard of question, but of our demands, most free in his reply. queen. did you assay him to any pastime? rosencrantz. madam, it so fell out that certain players we oerraught on the way. of these we told him, and there did seem in him a kind of joy to hear of it. they are about the court, and, as i think, they have already order this night to play before him. polonius. tis most true and he beseechd me to entreat your majesties to hear and see the matter. king. with all my heart and it doth much content me to hear him so inclind. good gentlemen, give him a further edge, and drive his purpose on to these delights. rosencrantz. we shall, my lord.  king. sweet gertrude, leave us too, for we have closely sent for hamlet hither, that he, as twere by accident, may here affront ophelia. her father and myself, lawful espials, will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen, we may of their encounter frankly judge, and gather by him, as he is behavd, ift be thaffliction of his love or no that thus he suffers for. queen. i shall obey you. and for your part, ophelia, i do wish that your good beauties be the happy cause of hamlets wildness so shall i hope your virtues will bring him to his wonted way again, to both your honours. ophelia. madam, i wish it may.  polonius. ophelia, walk you here.gracious, so please you, we will bestow ourselves. read on this book, that show of such an exercise may colour your loneliness.we are oft to blame in this, tis too much provd, that with devotions visage and pious action we do sugar oer the devil himself. king.  o tis too true! how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! the harlots cheek, beautied with plastering art, is not more ugly to the thing that helps it than is my deed to my most painted word. o heavy burden! polonius. i hear him coming. lets withdraw, my lord.  enter hamlet. hamlet. to be, or not to be, that is the question whether tis nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, or to take arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing end them? to dieto sleep, no more and by a sleep to say we end the heartache, and the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to tis a consummation devoutly to be wishd. to die, to sleep. to sleep, perchance to dreamay, theres the rub, for in that sleep of death what dreams may come, when we have shuffled off this mortal coil, must give us pause. theres the respect that makes calamity of so long life. for who would bear the whips and scorns of time, the oppressors wrong, the proud mans contumely, the pangs of disprizd love, the laws delay, the insolence of office, and the spurns that patient merit of the unworthy takes, when he himself might his quietus make with a bare bodkin? who would these fardels bear, to grunt and sweat under a weary life, but that the dread of something after death, the undiscoverd country, from whose bourn no traveller returns, puzzles the will, and makes us rather bear those ills we have than fly to others that we know not of? thus conscience does make cowards of us all, and thus the native hue of resolution is sicklied oer with the pale cast of thought, and enterprises of great pith and moment, with this regard their currents turn awry and lose the name of action. soft you now, the fair ophelia! nymph, in thy orisons be all my sins rememberd. ophelia. good my lord, how does your honour for this many a day? hamlet. i humbly thank you well, well, well. ophelia. my lord, i have remembrances of yours that i have longed long to redeliver. i pray you, now receive them. hamlet. no, not i. i never gave you aught. ophelia. my honourd lord, you know right well you did, and with them words of so sweet breath composd as made the things more rich their perfume lost, take these again for to the noble mind rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. there, my lord. hamlet. ha, ha! are you honest? ophelia. my lord? hamlet. are you fair? ophelia. what means your lordship? hamlet. that if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty. ophelia. could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty? hamlet. ay, truly for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness. this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. i did love you once. ophelia. indeed, my lord, you made me believe so. hamlet. you should not have believed me for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. i loved you not. ophelia. i was the more deceived. hamlet. get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent honest but yet i could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me. i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than i have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. what should such fellows as i do crawling between earth and heaven? we are arrant knaves all, believe none of us. go thy ways to a nunnery. wheres your father? ophelia. at home, my lord. hamlet. let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but ins own house. farewell. ophelia. o help him, you sweet heavens! hamlet. if thou dost marry, ill give thee this plague for thy dowry. be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. get thee to a nunnery, go farewell. or if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. to a nunnery, go and quickly too. farewell. ophelia. o heavenly powers, restore him! hamlet. i have heard of your paintings too, well enough. god hath given you one face, and you make yourselves another. you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nickname gods creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance. go to, ill no more ont, it hath made me mad. i say, we will have no more marriages. those that are married already, all but one, shall live the rest shall keep as they are. to a nunnery, go.  ophelia. o, what a noble mind is here oerthrown! the courtiers, soldiers, scholars, eye, tongue, sword, thexpectancy and rose of the fair state, the glass of fashion and the mould of form, thobservd of all observers, quite, quite down! and i, of ladies most deject and wretched, that suckd the honey of his music vows, now see that noble and most sovereign reason, like sweet bells jangled out of tune and harsh, that unmatchd form and feature of blown youth blasted with ecstasy. o woe is me, thave seen what i have seen, see what i see. enter king and polonius. king. love? his affections do not that way tend, nor what he spake, though it lackd form a little, was not like madness. theres something in his soul oer which his melancholy sits on brood, and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose will be some danger, which for to prevent, i have in quick determination thus set it down he shall with speed to england for the demand of our neglected tribute haply the seas and countries different, with variable objects, shall expel this something settled matter in his heart, whereon his brains still beating puts him thus from fashion of himself. what think you ont? polonius. it shall do well. but yet do i believe the origin and commencement of his grief sprung from neglected love. how now, ophelia? you need not tell us what lord hamlet said, we heard it all. my lord, do as you please, but if you hold it fit, after the play, let his queen mother all alone entreat him to show his grief, let her be round with him, and ill be placd, so please you, in the ear of all their conference. if she find him not, to england send him or confine him where your wisdom best shall think. king. it shall be so. madness in great ones must not unwatchd go.  scene ii. a hall in the castle. enter hamlet and certain players. hamlet. speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue. but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, i had as lief the towncrier spoke my lines. nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as i may say, whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. o, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwigpated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who, for the most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and noise. i would have such a fellow whipped for oerdoing termagant. it outherods herod. pray you avoid it. first player. i warrant your honour. hamlet. be not too tame neither but let your own discretion be your tutor. suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special observance, that you oerstep not the modesty of nature for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as twere the mirror up to nature to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. now, this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve the censure of the which one must in your allowance oerweigh a whole theatre of others. o, there be players that i have seen playand heard others praise, and that highlynot to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of christians, nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of natures journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably. first player. i hope we have reformd that indifferently with us, sir. hamlet. o reform it altogether. and let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them. for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then to be considered. thats villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. go make you ready.  enter polonius, rosencrantz and guildenstern. how now, my lord? will the king hear this piece of work? polonius. and the queen too, and that presently. hamlet. bid the players make haste.  will you two help to hasten them? rosencrantz and guildenstern. we will, my lord.  hamlet. what ho, horatio! enter horatio. horatio. here, sweet lord, at your service. hamlet. horatio, thou art een as just a man as eer my conversation copd withal. horatio. o my dear lord. hamlet. nay, do not think i flatter for what advancement may i hope from thee, that no revenue hast, but thy good spirits to feed and clothe thee? why should the poor be flatterd? no, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee where thrift may follow fawning. dost thou hear? since my dear soul was mistress of her choice, and could of men distinguish, her election hath seald thee for herself. for thou hast been as one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing, a man that fortunes buffets and rewards hast taen with equal thanks. and blessed are those whose blood and judgement are so well comingled that they are not a pipe for fortunes finger to sound what stop she please. give me that man that is not passions slave, and i will wear him in my hearts core, ay, in my heart of heart, as i do thee. something too much of this. there is a play tonight before the king. one scene of it comes near the circumstance which i have told thee, of my fathers death. i prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, even with the very comment of thy soul observe mine uncle. if his occulted guilt do not itself unkennel in one speech, it is a damned ghost that we have seen and my imaginations are as foul as vulcans stithy. give him heedful note for i mine eyes will rivet to his face and after we will both our judgements join in censure of his seeming. horatio. well, my lord. if he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, and scape detecting, i will pay the theft. hamlet. they are coming to the play. i must be idle. get you a place. danish march. a flourish. enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz, guildenstern and others. king. how fares our cousin hamlet? hamlet. excellent, i faith of the chameleons dish i eat the air, promisecrammed you cannot feed capons so. king. i have nothing with this answer, hamlet these words are not mine. hamlet. no, nor mine now.  my lord, you playd once i thuniversity, you say? polonius. that did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor. hamlet. what did you enact? polonius. i did enact julius caesar. i was killd i th capitol. brutus killed me. hamlet. it was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. be the players ready? rosencrantz. ay, my lord they stay upon your patience. queen. come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me. hamlet. no, good mother, heres metal more attractive. polonius.  o ho! do you mark that? hamlet. lady, shall i lie in your lap?  ophelia. no, my lord. hamlet. i mean, my head upon your lap? ophelia. ay, my lord. hamlet. do you think i meant country matters? ophelia. i think nothing, my lord. hamlet. thats a fair thought to lie between maids legs. ophelia. what is, my lord? hamlet. nothing. ophelia. you are merry, my lord. hamlet. who, i? ophelia. ay, my lord. hamlet. o god, your only jigmaker! what should a man do but be merry? for look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died withins two hours. ophelia. nay, tis twice two months, my lord. hamlet. so long? nay then, let the devil wear black, for ill have a suit of sables. o heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? then theres hope a great mans memory may outlive his life half a year. but byr lady, he must build churches then or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobbyhorse, whose epitaph is for, o, for o, the hobbyhorse is forgot! trumpets sound. the dumb show enters. enter a king and a queen very lovingly the queen embracing him and he her. she kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. he takes her up, and declines his head upon her neck. lays him down upon a bank of flowers. she, seeing him asleep, leaves him. anon comes in a fellow, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the kings ears, and exits. the queen returns, finds the king dead, and makes passionate action. the poisoner with some three or four mutes, comes in again, seeming to lament with her. the dead body is carried away. the poisoner woos the queen with gifts. she seems loth and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his love.  ophelia. what means this, my lord? hamlet. marry, this is miching mallecho it means mischief. ophelia. belike this show imports the argument of the play. enter prologue. hamlet. we shall know by this fellow the players cannot keep counsel theyll tell all. ophelia. will they tell us what this show meant? hamlet. ay, or any show that youll show him. be not you ashamed to show, hell not shame to tell you what it means. ophelia. you are naught, you are naught ill mark the play. prologue. for us, and for our tragedy, here stooping to your clemency, we beg your hearing patiently. hamlet. is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring? ophelia. tis brief, my lord. hamlet. as womans love. enter a king and a queen. player king. full thirty times hath phoebus cart gone round neptunes salt wash and tellus orbed ground, and thirty dozen moons with borrowd sheen about the world have times twelve thirties been, since love our hearts, and hymen did our hands unite commutual in most sacred bands. player queen. so many journeys may the sun and moon make us again count oer ere love be done. but, woe is me, you are so sick of late, so far from cheer and from your former state, that i distrust you. yet, though i distrust, discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must for womens fear and love holds quantity, in neither aught, or in extremity. now what my love is, proof hath made you know, and as my love is sizd, my fear is so. where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear where little fears grow great, great love grows there. player king. faith, i must leave thee, love, and shortly too my operant powers their functions leave to do and thou shalt live in this fair world behind, honourd, belovd, and haply one as kind for husband shalt thou player queen. o confound the rest. such love must needs be treason in my breast. in second husband let me be accurst! none wed the second but who killd the first. hamlet.  wormwood, wormwood. player queen. the instances that second marriage move are base respects of thrift, but none of love. a second time i kill my husband dead, when second husband kisses me in bed. player king. i do believe you think what now you speak but what we do determine, oft we break. purpose is but the slave to memory, of violent birth, but poor validity which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree, but fall unshaken when they mellow be. most necessary tis that we forget to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt. what to ourselves in passion we propose, the passion ending, doth the purpose lose. the violence of either grief or joy their own enactures with themselves destroy. where joy most revels, grief doth most lament grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. this world is not for aye nor tis not strange that even our loves should with our fortunes change, for tis a question left us yet to prove, whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love. the great man down, you mark his favourite flies, the poor advancd makes friends of enemies and hitherto doth love on fortune tend for who not needs shall never lack a friend, and who in want a hollow friend doth try, directly seasons him his enemy. but orderly to end where i begun, our wills and fates do so contrary run that our devices still are overthrown. our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own. so think thou wilt no second husband wed, but die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead. player queen. nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light, sport and repose lock from me day and night, to desperation turn my trust and hope, an anchors cheer in prison be my scope, each opposite that blanks the face of joy, meet what i would have well, and it destroy! both here and hence pursue me lasting strife, if, once a widow, ever i be wife. hamlet.  if she should break it now. player king. tis deeply sworn. sweet, leave me here awhile. my spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile the tedious day with sleep.  player queen. sleep rock thy brain, and never come mischance between us twain.  hamlet. madam, how like you this play? queen. the lady protests too much, methinks. hamlet. o, but shell keep her word. king. have you heard the argument? is there no offence int? hamlet. no, no, they do but jest, poison in jest no offence i th world. king. what do you call the play? hamlet. the mousetrap. marry, how? tropically. this play is the image of a murder done in vienna. gonzago is the dukes name, his wife baptista you shall see anon tis a knavish piece of work but what o that? your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not. let the galld jade wince our withers are unwrung. enter lucianus. this is one lucianus, nephew to the king. ophelia. you are a good chorus, my lord. hamlet. i could interpret between you and your love, if i could see the puppets dallying. ophelia. you are keen, my lord, you are keen. hamlet. it would cost you a groaning to take off my edge. ophelia. still better, and worse. hamlet. so you mistake your husbands.begin, murderer. pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge. lucianus. thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing, confederate season, else no creature seeing thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, with hecates ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, thy natural magic and dire property on wholesome life usurp immediately.  hamlet. he poisons him i thgarden fors estate. his names gonzago. the story is extant, and written in very choice italian. you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of gonzagos wife. ophelia. the king rises. hamlet. what, frighted with false fire? queen. how fares my lord? polonius. give oer the play. king. give me some light. away. all. lights, lights, lights.  hamlet. why, let the strucken deer go weep, the hart ungalled play for some must watch, while some must sleep, so runs the world away. would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, if the rest of my fortunes turn turk with me with two provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir? horatio. half a share. hamlet. a whole one, i. for thou dost know, o damon dear, this realm dismantled was of jove himself, and now reigns here a very, verypajock. horatio. you might have rhymed. hamlet. o good horatio, ill take the ghosts word for a thousand pound. didst perceive? horatio. very well, my lord. hamlet. upon the talk of the poisoning? horatio. i did very well note him. hamlet. ah, ha! come, some music. come, the recorders. for if the king like not the comedy, why then, belike he likes it not, perdie. come, some music. enter rosencrantz and guildenstern. guildenstern. good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you. hamlet. sir, a whole history. guildenstern. the king, sir hamlet. ay, sir, what of him? guildenstern. is in his retirement, marvellous distempered. hamlet. with drink, sir? guildenstern. no, my lord rather with choler. hamlet. your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the doctor, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler. guildenstern. good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start not so wildly from my affair. hamlet. i am tame, sir, pronounce. guildenstern. the queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you. hamlet. you are welcome. guildenstern. nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. if it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, i will do your mothers commandment if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business. hamlet. sir, i cannot. guildenstern. what, my lord? hamlet. make you a wholesome answer. my wits diseased. but, sir, such answer as i can make, you shall command or rather, as you say, my mother. therefore no more, but to the matter. my mother, you say, rosencrantz. then thus she says your behaviour hath struck her into amazement and admiration. hamlet. o wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! but is there no sequel at the heels of this mothers admiration? rosencrantz. she desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed. hamlet. we shall obey, were she ten times our mother. have you any further trade with us? rosencrantz. my lord, you once did love me. hamlet. and so i do still, by these pickers and stealers. rosencrantz. good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend. hamlet. sir, i lack advancement. rosencrantz. how can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in denmark? hamlet. ay, sir, but while the grass growsthe proverb is something musty. reenter the players with recorders. o, the recorders. let me see one.to withdraw with you, why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil? guildenstern. o my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly. hamlet. i do not well understand that. will you play upon this pipe? guildenstern. my lord, i cannot. hamlet. i pray you. guildenstern. believe me, i cannot. hamlet. i do beseech you. guildenstern. i know no touch of it, my lord. hamlet. tis as easy as lying govern these ventages with your finger and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. look you, these are the stops. guildenstern. but these cannot i command to any utterance of harmony. i have not the skill. hamlet. why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! you would play upon me you would seem to know my stops you would pluck out the heart of my mystery you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. sblood, do you think i am easier to be played on than a pipe? call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me. enter polonius. god bless you, sir. polonius. my lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently. hamlet. do you see yonder cloud thats almost in shape of a camel? polonius. by the mass, and tis like a camel indeed. hamlet. methinks it is like a weasel. polonius. it is backed like a weasel. hamlet. or like a whale. polonius. very like a whale. hamlet. then will i come to my mother by and by.they fool me to the top of my bent.i will come by and by. polonius. i will say so.  hamlet. by and by is easily said. leave me, friends.  tis now the very witching time of night, when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out contagion to this world. now could i drink hot blood, and do such bitter business as the day would quake to look on. soft now, to my mother. o heart, lose not thy nature let not ever the soul of nero enter this firm bosom let me be cruel, not unnatural. i will speak daggers to her, but use none my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites. how in my words somever she be shent, to give them seals never, my soul, consent.  scene iii. a room in the castle. enter king, rosencrantz and guildenstern. king. i like him not, nor stands it safe with us to let his madness range. therefore prepare you, i your commission will forthwith dispatch, and he to england shall along with you. the terms of our estate may not endure hazard so near us as doth hourly grow out of his lunacies. guildenstern. we will ourselves provide. most holy and religious fear it is to keep those many many bodies safe that live and feed upon your majesty. rosencrantz. the single and peculiar life is bound with all the strength and armour of the mind, to keep itself from noyance but much more that spirit upon whose weal depend and rest the lives of many. the cease of majesty dies not alone but like a gulf doth draw whats near it with it. it is a massy wheel fixd on the summit of the highest mount, to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things are mortisd and adjoind which when it falls, each small annexment, petty consequence, attends the boistrous ruin. never alone did the king sigh, but with a general groan. king. arm you, i pray you, to this speedy voyage for we will fetters put upon this fear, which now goes too freefooted. rosencrantz and guildenstern. we will haste us.  enter polonius. polonius. my lord, hes going to his mothers closet. behind the arras ill convey myself to hear the process. ill warrant shell tax him home, and as you said, and wisely was it said, tis meet that some more audience than a mother, since nature makes them partial, should oerhear the speech of vantage. fare you well, my liege, ill call upon you ere you go to bed, and tell you what i know. king. thanks, dear my lord.  o, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven it hath the primal eldest curse upont, a brothers murder! pray can i not, though inclination be as sharp as will my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, and, like a man to double business bound, i stand in pause where i shall first begin, and both neglect. what if this cursed hand were thicker than itself with brothers blood, is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens to wash it white as snow? whereto serves mercy but to confront the visage of offence? and whats in prayer but this twofold force, to be forestalled ere we come to fall, or pardond being down? then ill look up. my fault is past. but o, what form of prayer can serve my turn? forgive me my foul murder! that cannot be since i am still possessd of those effects for which i did the murder, my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. may one be pardond and retain thoffence? in the corrupted currents of this world offences gilded hand may shove by justice, and oft tis seen the wicked prize itself buys out the law. but tis not so above there is no shuffling, there the action lies in his true nature, and we ourselves compelld even to the teeth and forehead of our faults, to give in evidence. what then? what rests? try what repentance can. what can it not? yet what can it, when one cannot repent? o wretched state! o bosom black as death! o limed soul, that struggling to be free, art more engagd! help, angels! make assay bow, stubborn knees and heart with strings of steel, be soft as sinews of the newborn babe. all may be well.  enter hamlet. hamlet. now might i do it pat, now he is praying. and now ill dot. and so he goes to heaven and so am i revengd. that would be scannd a villain kills my father, and for that i, his sole son, do this same villain send to heaven. o, this is hire and salary, not revenge. he took my father grossly, full of bread, with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may and how his audit stands, who knows save heaven? but in our circumstance and course of thought, tis heavy with him. and am i then revengd, to take him in the purging of his soul, when he is fit and seasond for his passage? no. up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent when he is drunk asleep or in his rage, or in thincestuous pleasure of his bed, at gaming, swearing or about some act that has no relish of salvation int, then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven, and that his soul may be as damnd and black as hell, whereto it goes. my mother stays. this physic but prolongs thy sickly days.  the king rises and advances. king. my words fly up, my thoughts remain below. words without thoughts never to heaven go.  scene iv. another room in the castle. enter queen and polonius. polonius. he will come straight. look you lay home to him, tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, and that your grace hath screend and stood between much heat and him. ill silence me een here. pray you be round with him. hamlet.  mother, mother, mother. queen. ill warrant you, fear me not. withdraw, i hear him coming.  enter hamlet. hamlet. now, mother, whats the matter? queen. hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended. hamlet. mother, you have my father much offended. queen. come, come, you answer with an idle tongue. hamlet. go, go, you question with a wicked tongue. queen. why, how now, hamlet? hamlet. whats the matter now? queen. have you forgot me? hamlet. no, by the rood, not so. you are the queen, your husbands brothers wife, and, would it were not so. you are my mother. queen. nay, then ill set those to you that can speak. hamlet. come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge. you go not till i set you up a glass where you may see the inmost part of you. queen. what wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me? help, help, ho! polonius.  what, ho! help, help, help! hamlet. how now? a rat?  dead for a ducat, dead!  polonius.  o, i am slain!  queen. o me, what hast thou done? hamlet. nay, i know not. is it the king?  queen. o what a rash and bloody deed is this! hamlet. a bloody deed. almost as bad, good mother, as kill a king and marry with his brother. queen. as kill a king? hamlet. ay, lady, twas my word.  thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell! i took thee for thy better. take thy fortune, thou findst to be too busy is some danger. leave wringing of your hands. peace, sit you down, and let me wring your heart, for so i shall, if it be made of penetrable stuff if damned custom have not brazd it so, that it is proof and bulwark against sense. queen. what have i done, that thou darst wag thy tongue in noise so rude against me? hamlet. such an act that blurs the grace and blush of modesty, calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose from the fair forehead of an innocent love, and sets a blister there. makes marriage vows as false as dicers oaths. o such a deed as from the body of contraction plucks the very soul, and sweet religion makes a rhapsody of words. heavens face doth glow, yea this solidity and compound mass, with tristful visage, as against the doom, is thoughtsick at the act. queen. ay me, what act, that roars so loud, and thunders in the index? hamlet. look here upon this picture, and on this, the counterfeit presentment of two brothers. see what a grace was seated on this brow, hyperions curls, the front of jove himself, an eye like mars, to threaten and command, a station like the herald mercury new lighted on a heavenkissing hill a combination and a form indeed, where every god did seem to set his seal, to give the world assurance of a man. this was your husband. look you now what follows. here is your husband, like a mildewd ear blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes? could you on this fair mountain leave to feed, and batten on this moor? ha! have you eyes? you cannot call it love for at your age the heyday in the blood is tame, its humble, and waits upon the judgement and what judgement would step from this to this? sense sure you have, else could you not have motion but sure that sense is apoplexd, for madness would not err nor sense to ecstacy was neer so thralld but it reservd some quantity of choice to serve in such a difference. what devil wast that thus hath cozend you at hoodmanblind? eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, or but a sickly part of one true sense could not so mope. o shame! where is thy blush? rebellious hell, if thou canst mutine in a matrons bones, to flaming youth let virtue be as wax, and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame when the compulsive ardour gives the charge, since frost itself as actively doth burn, and reason panders will. queen. o hamlet, speak no more. thou turnst mine eyes into my very soul, and there i see such black and grained spots as will not leave their tinct. hamlet. nay, but to live in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed, stewd in corruption, honeying and making love over the nasty sty. queen. o speak to me no more these words like daggers enter in mine ears no more, sweet hamlet. hamlet. a murderer and a villain a slave that is not twentieth part the tithe of your precedent lord. a vice of kings, a cutpurse of the empire and the rule, that from a shelf the precious diadem stole and put it in his pocket! queen. no more. hamlet. a king of shreds and patches! enter ghost. save me and hover oer me with your wings, you heavenly guards! what would your gracious figure? queen. alas, hes mad. hamlet. do you not come your tardy son to chide, that, lapsd in time and passion, lets go by the important acting of your dread command? o say! ghost. do not forget. this visitation is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. but look, amazement on thy mother sits. o step between her and her fighting soul. conceit in weakest bodies strongest works. speak to her, hamlet. hamlet. how is it with you, lady? queen. alas, how ist with you, that you do bend your eye on vacancy, and with the incorporal air do hold discourse? forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep, and, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm, your bedded hairs, like life in excrements, start up and stand an end. o gentle son, upon the heat and flame of thy distemper sprinkle cool patience. whereon do you look? hamlet. on him, on him! look you how pale he glares, his form and cause conjoind, preaching to stones, would make them capable.do not look upon me, lest with this piteous action you convert my stern effects. then what i have to do will want true colour tears perchance for blood. queen. to whom do you speak this? hamlet. do you see nothing there? queen. nothing at all yet all that is i see. hamlet. nor did you nothing hear? queen. no, nothing but ourselves. hamlet. why, look you there! look how it steals away! my father, in his habit as he livd! look where he goes even now out at the portal.  queen. this is the very coinage of your brain. this bodiless creation ecstasy is very cunning in. hamlet. ecstasy! my pulse as yours doth temperately keep time, and makes as healthful music. it is not madness that i have utterd. bring me to the test, and i the matter will reword which madness would gambol from. mother, for love of grace, lay not that flattering unction to your soul that not your trespass, but my madness speaks. it will but skin and film the ulcerous place, whilst rank corruption, mining all within, infects unseen. confess yourself to heaven, repent whats past, avoid what is to come and do not spread the compost on the weeds, to make them ranker. forgive me this my virtue for in the fatness of these pursy times virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good. queen. o hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain. hamlet. o throw away the worser part of it, and live the purer with the other half. good night. but go not to mine uncles bed. assume a virtue, if you have it not. that monster custom, who all sense doth eat, of habits evil, is angel yet in this, that to the use of actions fair and good he likewise gives a frock or livery that aptly is put on. refrain tonight, and that shall lend a kind of easiness to the next abstinence. the next more easy for use almost can change the stamp of nature, and either curb the devil, or throw him out with wondrous potency. once more, good night, and when you are desirous to be blesd, ill blessing beg of you. for this same lord  i do repent but heaven hath pleasd it so, to punish me with this, and this with me, that i must be their scourge and minister. i will bestow him, and will answer well the death i gave him. so again, good night. i must be cruel, only to be kind thus bad begins, and worse remains behind. one word more, good lady. queen. what shall i do? hamlet. not this, by no means, that i bid you do let the bloat king tempt you again to bed, pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, and let him, for a pair of reechy kisses, or paddling in your neck with his damnd fingers, make you to ravel all this matter out, that i essentially am not in madness, but mad in craft. twere good you let him know, for who thats but a queen, fair, sober, wise, would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib, such dear concernings hide? who would do so? no, in despite of sense and secrecy, unpeg the basket on the houses top, let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, to try conclusions, in the basket creep and break your own neck down. queen. be thou assurd, if words be made of breath, and breath of life, i have no life to breathe what thou hast said to me. hamlet. i must to england, you know that? queen. alack, i had forgot. tis so concluded on. hamlet. theres letters seald and my two schoolfellows, whom i will trust as i will adders fangd, they bear the mandate, they must sweep my way and marshal me to knavery. let it work for tis the sport to have the enginer hoist with his own petard, and t shall go hard but i will delve one yard below their mines and blow them at the moon. o, tis most sweet, when in one line two crafts directly meet. this man shall set me packing. ill lug the guts into the neighbour room. mother, good night. indeed, this counsellor is now most still, most secret, and most grave, who was in life a foolish prating knave. come, sir, to draw toward an end with you. good night, mother.  act iv scene i. a room in the castle. enter king, queen, rosencrantz and guildenstern. king. theres matter in these sighs. these profound heaves you must translate tis fit we understand them. where is your son? queen. bestow this place on us a little while.  ah, my good lord, what have i seen tonight! king. what, gertrude? how does hamlet? queen. mad as the sea and wind, when both contend which is the mightier. in his lawless fit behind the arras hearing something stir, whips out his rapier, cries a rat, a rat! and in this brainish apprehension kills the unseen good old man. king. o heavy deed! it had been so with us, had we been there. his liberty is full of threats to all to you yourself, to us, to everyone. alas, how shall this bloody deed be answerd? it will be laid to us, whose providence should have kept short, restraind, and out of haunt this mad young man. but so much was our love we would not understand what was most fit, but like the owner of a foul disease, to keep it from divulging, let it feed even on the pith of life. where is he gone? queen. to draw apart the body he hath killd, oer whom his very madness, like some ore among a mineral of metals base, shows itself pure. he weeps for what is done. king. o gertrude, come away! the sun no sooner shall the mountains touch but we will ship him hence, and this vile deed we must with all our majesty and skill both countenance and excuse.ho, guildenstern! reenter rosencrantz and guildenstern. friends both, go join you with some further aid hamlet in madness hath polonius slain, and from his mothers closet hath he draggd him. go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body into the chapel. i pray you haste in this.  come, gertrude, well call up our wisest friends, and let them know both what we mean to do and whats untimely done, so haply slander, whose whisper oer the worlds diameter, as level as the cannon to his blank, transports his poisond shot, may miss our name, and hit the woundless air. o, come away! my soul is full of discord and dismay.  scene ii. another room in the castle. enter hamlet. hamlet. safely stowed. rosencrantz and guildenstern.  hamlet! lord hamlet! hamlet. what noise? who calls on hamlet? o, here they come. enter rosencrantz and guildenstern. rosencrantz. what have you done, my lord, with the dead body? hamlet. compounded it with dust, whereto tis kin. rosencrantz. tell us where tis, that we may take it thence, and bear it to the chapel. hamlet. do not believe it. rosencrantz. believe what? hamlet. that i can keep your counsel, and not mine own. besides, to be demanded of a spongewhat replication should be made by the son of a king? rosencrantz. take you me for a sponge, my lord? hamlet. ay, sir that soaks up the kings countenance, his rewards, his authorities. but such officers do the king best service in the end he keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw first mouthed, to be last swallowed when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again. rosencrantz. i understand you not, my lord. hamlet. i am glad of it. a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear. rosencrantz. my lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to the king. hamlet. the body is with the king, but the king is not with the body. the king is a thing guildenstern. a thing, my lord! hamlet. of nothing. bring me to him. hide fox, and all after.  scene iii. another room in the castle. enter king, attended. king. i have sent to seek him and to find the body. how dangerous is it that this man goes loose! yet must not we put the strong law on him hes lovd of the distracted multitude, who like not in their judgement, but their eyes and where tis so, thoffenders scourge is weighd, but never the offence. to bear all smooth and even, this sudden sending him away must seem deliberate pause. diseases desperate grown by desperate appliance are relievd, or not at all. enter rosencrantz. how now? what hath befalln? rosencrantz. where the dead body is bestowd, my lord, we cannot get from him. king. but where is he? rosencrantz. without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure. king. bring him before us. rosencrantz. ho, guildenstern! bring in my lord. enter hamlet and guildenstern. king. now, hamlet, wheres polonius? hamlet. at supper. king. at supper? where? hamlet. not where he eats, but where he is eaten. a certain convocation of politic worms are een at him. your worm is your only emperor for diet. we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots. your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service,two dishes, but to one table. thats the end. king. alas, alas! hamlet. a man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm. king. what dost thou mean by this? hamlet. nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar. king. where is polonius? hamlet. in heaven. send thither to see. if your messenger find him not there, seek him i thother place yourself. but indeed, if you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby. king.  go seek him there. hamlet. he will stay till you come.  king. hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety, which we do tender, as we dearly grieve for that which thou hast done,must send thee hence with fiery quickness. therefore prepare thyself the bark is ready, and the wind at help, thassociates tend, and everything is bent for england. hamlet. for england? king. ay, hamlet. hamlet. good. king. so is it, if thou knewst our purposes. hamlet. i see a cherub that sees them. but, come for england! farewell, dear mother. king. thy loving father, hamlet. hamlet. my mother. father and mother is man and wife man and wife is one flesh and so, my mother. come, for england.  king. follow him at foot. tempt him with speed aboard delay it not ill have him hence tonight. away, for everything is seald and done that else leans on thaffair. pray you make haste.  and england, if my love thou holdst at aught, as my great power thereof may give thee sense, since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red after the danish sword, and thy free awe pays homage to us,thou mayst not coldly set our sovereign process, which imports at full, by letters conjuring to that effect, the present death of hamlet. do it, england for like the hectic in my blood he rages, and thou must cure me. till i know tis done, howeer my haps, my joys were neer begun.  scene iv. a plain in denmark. enter fortinbras and forces marching. fortinbras. go, captain, from me greet the danish king. tell him that by his license, fortinbras craves the conveyance of a promisd march over his kingdom. you know the rendezvous. if that his majesty would aught with us, we shall express our duty in his eye and let him know so. captain. i will dot, my lord. fortinbras. go softly on.  enter hamlet, rosencrantz, guildenstern c. hamlet. good sir, whose powers are these? captain. they are of norway, sir. hamlet. how purposd, sir, i pray you? captain. against some part of poland. hamlet. who commands them, sir? captain. the nephew to old norway, fortinbras. hamlet. goes it against the main of poland, sir, or for some frontier? captain. truly to speak, and with no addition, we go to gain a little patch of ground that hath in it no profit but the name. to pay five ducats, five, i would not farm it nor will it yield to norway or the pole a ranker rate, should it be sold in fee. hamlet. why, then the polack never will defend it. captain. yes, it is already garrisond. hamlet. two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats will not debate the question of this straw! this is thimposthume of much wealth and peace, that inward breaks, and shows no cause without why the man dies. i humbly thank you, sir. captain. god b wi you, sir.  rosencrantz. willt please you go, my lord? hamlet. ill be with you straight. go a little before.  how all occasions do inform against me, and spur my dull revenge. what is a man if his chief good and market of his time be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more. sure he that made us with such large discourse, looking before and after, gave us not that capability and godlike reason to fust in us unusd. now whether it be bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple of thinking too precisely on thevent, a thought which, quarterd, hath but one part wisdom and ever three parts coward,i do not know why yet i live to say this things to do, sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and means to dot. examples gross as earth exhort me, witness this army of such mass and charge, led by a delicate and tender prince, whose spirit, with divine ambition puffd, makes mouths at the invisible event, exposing what is mortal and unsure to all that fortune, death, and danger dare, even for an eggshell. rightly to be great is not to stir without great argument, but greatly to find quarrel in a straw when honours at the stake. how stand i then, that have a father killd, a mother staind, excitements of my reason and my blood, and let all sleep, while to my shame i see the imminent death of twenty thousand men that, for a fantasy and trick of fame, go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, which is not tomb enough and continent to hide the slain? o, from this time forth, my thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth.  scene v. elsinore. a room in the castle. enter queen, horatio and a gentleman. queen. i will not speak with her. gentleman. she is importunate, indeed distract. her mood will needs be pitied. queen. what would she have? gentleman. she speaks much of her father says she hears theres tricks i th world, and hems, and beats her heart, spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt, that carry but half sense. her speech is nothing, yet the unshaped use of it doth move the hearers to collection they aim at it, and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts, which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them, indeed would make one think there might be thought, though nothing sure, yet much unhappily. twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew dangerous conjectures in illbreeding minds. queen. let her come in.  to my sick soul, as sins true nature is, each toy seems prologue to some great amiss. so full of artless jealousy is guilt, it spills itself in fearing to be spilt. enter ophelia. ophelia. where is the beauteous majesty of denmark? queen. how now, ophelia? ophelia.  how should i your true love know from another one? by his cockle hat and staff and his sandal shoon. queen. alas, sweet lady, what imports this song? ophelia. say you? nay, pray you mark.  he is dead and gone, lady, he is dead and gone, at his head a grass green turf, at his heels a stone. queen. nay, but ophelia ophelia. pray you mark.  white his shroud as the mountain snow. enter king. queen. alas, look here, my lord! ophelia.  larded all with sweet flowers which bewept to the grave did not go with truelove showers. king. how do you, pretty lady? ophelia. well, god dild you! they say the owl was a bakers daughter. lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. god be at your table! king. conceit upon her father. ophelia. pray you, lets have no words of this but when they ask you what it means, say you this  tomorrow is saint valentines day, all in the morning betime, and i a maid at your window, to be your valentine. then up he rose and donnd his clothes, and duppd the chamber door, let in the maid, that out a maid never departed more. king. pretty ophelia! ophelia. indeed la, without an oath, ill make an end ont.  by gis and by saint charity, alack, and fie for shame! young men will dot if they come tot by cock, they are to blame. quoth she, before you tumbled me, you promisd me to wed. so would i ha done, by yonder sun, an thou hadst not come to my bed. king. how long hath she been thus? ophelia. i hope all will be well. we must be patient. but i cannot choose but weep, to think they would lay him i th cold ground. my brother shall know of it. and so i thank you for your good counsel. come, my coach! good night, ladies good night, sweet ladies good night, good night.  king. follow her close give her good watch, i pray you.  o, this is the poison of deep grief it springs all from her fathers death. o gertrude, gertrude, when sorrows come, they come not single spies, but in battalions. first, her father slain next, your son gone and he most violent author of his own just remove the people muddied, thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers for good polonius death and we have done but greenly in huggermugger to inter him. poor ophelia divided from herself and her fair judgement, without the which we are pictures or mere beasts. last, and as much containing as all these, her brother is in secret come from france, feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds, and wants not buzzers to infect his ear with pestilent speeches of his fathers death, wherein necessity, of matter beggard, will nothing stick our person to arraign in ear and ear. o my dear gertrude, this, like to a murdering piece, in many places gives me superfluous death.  queen. alack, what noise is this? king. where are my switzers? let them guard the door. enter a gentleman. what is the matter? gentleman. save yourself, my lord. the ocean, overpeering of his list, eats not the flats with more impetuous haste than young laertes, in a riotous head, oerbears your offices. the rabble call him lord, and, as the world were now but to begin, antiquity forgot, custom not known, the ratifiers and props of every word, they cry choose we! laertes shall be king! caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds, laertes shall be king, laertes king. queen. how cheerfully on the false trail they cry. o, this is counter, you false danish dogs.  king. the doors are broke. enter laertes, armed danes following. laertes. where is this king?sirs, stand you all without. danes. no, lets come in. laertes. i pray you, give me leave. danes. we will, we will.  laertes. i thank you. keep the door. o thou vile king, give me my father. queen. calmly, good laertes. laertes. that drop of blood thats calm proclaims me bastard cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot even here between the chaste unsmirched brow of my true mother. king. what is the cause, laertes, that thy rebellion looks so giantlike? let him go, gertrude. do not fear our person. theres such divinity doth hedge a king, that treason can but peep to what it would, acts little of his will.tell me, laertes, why thou art thus incensd.let him go, gertrude speak, man. laertes. where is my father? king. dead. queen. but not by him. king. let him demand his fill. laertes. how came he dead? ill not be juggled with. to hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil! conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit! i dare damnation. to this point i stand, that both the worlds, i give to negligence, let come what comes only ill be revengd most throughly for my father. king. who shall stay you? laertes. my will, not all the world. and for my means, ill husband them so well, they shall go far with little. king. good laertes, if you desire to know the certainty of your dear fathers death, ist writ in your revenge that, sweepstake, you will draw both friend and foe, winner and loser? laertes. none but his enemies. king. will you know them then? laertes. to his good friends thus wide ill ope my arms and, like the kind liferendering pelican, repast them with my blood. king. why, now you speak like a good child and a true gentleman. that i am guiltless of your fathers death, and am most sensibly in grief for it, it shall as level to your judgement pear as day does to your eye. danes.  let her come in. laertes. how now! what noise is that? reenter ophelia, fantastically dressed with straws and flowers. o heat, dry up my brains. tears seven times salt, burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye. by heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight, till our scale turn the beam. o rose of may! dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia! o heavens, ist possible a young maids wits should be as mortal as an old mans life? nature is fine in love, and where tis fine, it sends some precious instance of itself after the thing it loves. ophelia.  they bore him barefacd on the bier, hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny and on his grave raind many a tear. fare you well, my dove! laertes. hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, it could not move thus. ophelia. you must sing down adown, and you call him adowna. o, how the wheel becomes it! it is the false steward that stole his masters daughter. laertes. this nothings more than matter. ophelia. theres rosemary, thats for remembrance pray love, remember. and there is pansies, thats for thoughts. laertes. a document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted. ophelia. theres fennel for you, and columbines. theres rue for you and heres some for me. we may call it herb of grace o sundays. o you must wear your rue with a difference. theres a daisy. i would give you some violets, but they witherd all when my father died. they say he made a good end.  for bonny sweet robin is all my joy. laertes. thought and affliction, passion, hell itself she turns to favour and to prettiness. ophelia.  and will he not come again? and will he not come again? no, no, he is dead, go to thy deathbed, he never will come again. his beard was as white as snow, all flaxen was his poll. he is gone, he is gone, and we cast away moan. god ha mercy on his soul. and of all christian souls, i pray god. god b wi ye.  laertes. do you see this, o god? king. laertes, i must commune with your grief, or you deny me right. go but apart, make choice of whom your wisest friends you will, and they shall hear and judge twixt you and me. if by direct or by collateral hand they find us touchd, we will our kingdom give, our crown, our life, and all that we call ours to you in satisfaction but if not, be you content to lend your patience to us, and we shall jointly labour with your soul to give it due content. laertes. let this be so his means of death, his obscure burial, no trophy, sword, nor hatchment oer his bones, no noble rite, nor formal ostentation, cry to be heard, as twere from heaven to earth, that i must callt in question. king. so you shall. and where thoffence is let the great axe fall. i pray you go with me.  scene vi. another room in the castle. enter horatio and a servant. horatio. what are they that would speak with me? servant. sailors, sir. they say they have letters for you. horatio. let them come in.  i do not know from what part of the world i should be greeted, if not from lord hamlet. enter sailors. first sailor. god bless you, sir. horatio. let him bless thee too. first sailor. he shall, sir, andt please him. theres a letter for you, sir. it comes from thambassador that was bound for england if your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is. horatio.  horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the king. they have letters for him. ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase. finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple i boarded them. on the instant they got clear of our ship, so i alone became their prisoner. they have dealt with me like thieves of mercy. but they knew what they did i am to do a good turn for them. let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldst fly death. i have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb yet are they much too light for the bore of the matter. these good fellows will bring thee where i am. rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their course for england of them i have much to tell thee. farewell. he that thou knowest thine, hamlet. come, i will give you way for these your letters, and dot the speedier, that you may direct me to him from whom you brought them.  scene vii. another room in the castle. enter king and laertes. king. now must your conscience my acquittance seal, and you must put me in your heart for friend, sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, that he which hath your noble father slain pursud my life. laertes. it well appears. but tell me why you proceeded not against these feats, so crimeful and so capital in nature, as by your safety, wisdom, all things else, you mainly were stirrd up. king. o, for two special reasons, which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinewd, but yet to me they are strong. the queen his moth